[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The holistic world of healing
includes plants and herbs
channeling energy as well as
both spiritual and physical
modalities.
Healers are
multidimensional beings
who dance between the realms
of the seen and unseen.
These individuals
have the ability
to facilitate a shift in
people, offering them insight
and support, reconnecting people
with themselves and the greater
collective, healing the
world one person at a time,
healing from the other side.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I am Brett Monk Omchi.
That's how I choose
to call myself.
And monk because
I'm still learning.
The master is a breath itself.
A poet and Indian
mystic called Kabir,
said "God is in the
breath within the breath."
So there's so much to learn
although I'm a specialist
and I've been doing breath
work every morning consistently
for at least 45 minutes
to an hour and a half.
And sometimes the second
and third time in the day.
And although I've been
doing it consistently
for 3 and 1/2 years, and
have been doing breath work
since the age of 12, actually--
I asked my buddies to come
have a friendly competition.
Filled a bucket of
water, and so who
could keep our head under
water for the longest.
And I did that remarkably
longer than the rest.
So some 40 years later, I'm
now a breath specialist,
and that's kind of called me.
Then about 23 years ago,
I changed my lifestyle.
I used to be in
front of the camera.
I used to be a model and did
some really amazing work.
And then I felt it didn't serve
me to promote product that's
more commercially driven, so I
changed my lifestyle totally.
I went to India.
I did a meditation
retreat for 10 days
after 10 days of being there.
20 days later, I did my
second meditation retreat.
Why?
Because I was hungry to develop
myself to be more fulfilled,
peaceful, centered,
and purpose-driven.
And 23 years later, I'm so
grateful that along the way,
I've picked up more meditative
and mindfulness techniques
to bring into a
centerfold of breathwork.
>> Conscious breathing is the
direct awareness of breath.
Our breathing is controlled
consciously or unconsciously.
Mindfulness and
awareness training
uses conscious breathing to
increase awareness and body
consciousness.
>> Tomorrow, I will be doing
a breath session with Gigh
He's been a client of mine.
I've been doing transformational
coaching with him,
and I've been doing
breath classes with him.
So the session is going to be
at an incredible setting that's
world class.
So we're in Plettenberg
Bay, South Africa.
And the studio is called
The Space Between,
and it's between land and ocean.
It's on the cliff
and it's got fynbos--
our local vegetation.
So this also enhances the
energy we have from the air
that we breathe.
And we're doing it at sunrise,
which is a most optimal time.
Traffic and human
activity is down to almost
none when we're doing it at
sunrise, and that's around 5:15
in the morning.
And we live in an area
where there's pretty much
no pollution because we
live with nature, surrounded
by nature.
And typically, if one's
practicing between 4 and 6
in the morning, it's that window
that many spiritual practices,
including yoga, says that
it's a gateway for just a very
high resonance of connecting
very deeply with a most
powerful energy--
4 to 6 in the morning.
So I'm glad we're catching our
session at sunrise tomorrow.
>> Doing some breathing
for the last five years.
I did a course
called Art of Living
that my mom sent me to on
my birthday a few years ago.
And I found the routine
that they were doing,
it was really awesome
and energizing,
and I kept doing that.
It makes the mind so awake
and the body so relaxed
that you enter the states,
similar to psychedelic state,
where your mind is
creating things that--
I had this six-month
period once where
like after my
breathing sessions,
I would lie down and start
visualizing people that I know
and connecting this
white line to them.
And it had like the
most profound effects.
Like just people would
call me out of the blue
and tell me what a great
day they're having.
And I feel like that if the real
connection sort of disappeared
and came back and I guess it
kind of goes in waves in life.
Then I came here to Pletts.
I met some lady on the beach
because my dog knew her dog.
And she connected
me to these groups
with all these healers on
them, and somebody sent me
images of Pletts, and I was
like, yeah, that's what I need.
Been out of my
breathwork for a while
and need to get back into it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm going to do
two forms of release,
relieving ourselves from that
which we could carry that
doesn't serve us, right?
It can be stress, anxiety,
tension, doubt, worry, anger,
frustration, taking away our
freedom of flowing with life
and being present.
And that could be past
or future related.
So here is a way to
just shake it off.
And I feel when
we do more release
at the beginning of
the session, then
we have a chance
to be more present,
to be more optimal,
to have more capacity
to get more energy, more
focus, more brain entrainment,
that kind of thing, right?
So what's the mild stuff
that's affecting you,
that's niggling you.
>> There's a lot of intensity
trying to get everything
working at the same time, and
a lot of pressure to please
everybody and get the
whole family ready, right?
>> You're a dad of
two young girls,
and you moved from Johannesburg
to Plettenberg Bay a few months
ago.
So there's a lot of adjustment.
>> And there's a lot
of excitement as well.
>> Right.
>> Maybe too much.
Maybe I can release
some of that too.
>> OK, brilliant.
I guess in knowing what those
things that niggle you, take
a deeper breath in, and feel
the tension build somewhat,
and then release for
the open mouthed sigh.
[LOUD EXHALE]
Wonderful.
That's it.
So a key significant
reason why this works
is that the nervous system, our
emotions, and breath are all
interdependent, interrelated.
So when we do breathwork and
we bring mindfulness into it,
we bring emotion into it, and
we bring some body action,
then we come with so
many domains of how
we can shift, how
we can transform,
how we can transmute
energy, and be more settled
and be more centered.
OK, so next one, level two,
level three, the intense stuff,
stuff that's not serving you.
And it could be your
wife that irritated you,
or your daughter, or the
guy at the traffic light.
So more gross irritations,
frustrations, anger taking you
away from your center, right?
This one as you
breathe in, you're
going to bend your elbows
and bring the arms up.
As you breathe out, you're
going to kind of give it
away and kind of purge
it down, all right?
So this is a dynamic one.
That's it.
So you're purging.
We're looking to be
transparent, to be
authentic in our sessions, we're
not shy, to just be ourselves.
The more we are
ourselves, the more
we're going to optimize
the effect of what we're
doing in our sessions, right?
So this one is like
really just purging out
that stuff that's unsettled.
What do you want to release?
What's not serving you?
If you were standing on
a mountain top and no one
else around, what is
that stuff that you'd
want to shout out, let
go, scream to release, OK?
Knowing what that
is, deep breath in.
[DEEP INHALE]
[LOUD EXHALE]
That's a beautiful sound.
[DEEP INHALE]
[LOUD EXHALE]
Totally letting it go.
It's more energetic
than physical.
[LOUD EXHALE]
One will for good measure.
We're going to breathe
out and stay there.
[LOUD EXHALE]
Drop your hands to the
ground, tilt your head,
feel those sensations.
And when you're
ready to breathe in,
you can breathe in sitting up.
Bring your hands
back to your thighs.
Feel the sensations.
Allow the breath to
come back to normal.
Feel the effects.
How is the shift?
>> Lovely stillness, and
energy moving up the spine.
>> The term Pranayam or
Pranayama comes from yoga.
It actually means
breath regulation.
We sometimes get caught
up and get rigid.
When we regulate, then
we can flow better
and we can be mindful as to
how we are pacing ourselves.
When we are well
paced in our lives,
we're going to be more optimal
as a dad, as a husband,
as a businessman, and
especially yourself
that's interested in community
development, like myself,
then you can just have very
good lifestyle balance, right?
So the same with the breathing.
Once we allow the diaphragm to
regulate the breath, especially
with the out breath,
and especially
with techniques like
this, we're going
to breathe in for
full hold for four,
breathe out for full hold
for four, box breathing,
very powerful technique
to help the regulation.
Just optimize energy.
When we hold the breath,
especially in breath,
the mitochondria goes
through five chemical steps
that boost energy in the cells
and gives us more vitality.
So deeper breath in.
[DEEP INHALE]
Holding.
And out.
[EXHALE]
And in.
[DEEP INHALE]
We go through releasing that
which does not serve us.
So if we're stressed,
anxious, having frustration,
irritation, doubt, unsettled
about some situation,
the first part of it is,
after awareness, we release
that which does not serve us.
So we lighten up,
we are more primed
so that we can use energy and
build more on that energy.
And then we move into a sequence
of techniques that involve
body movement and breathing.
Then keeping the chin
more parallel, which
is more challenging, but
that way we're working more
the lower and the middle spine.
So want to warm up
the spine, exercise it
from the lower area to
the middle to the top.
It's so beautiful.
I like the way your hands
are nice and relaxed.
So it means it's going all
the way up to your shoulders.
Beautiful.
10 seconds, a little faster.
Release the lower
jaw, half a smile.
Deep breath in.
Sit up nice and tall.
Relax the shoulders,
pulling the perineum.
So during these exercises,
you could quite likely
feel the energy rush
up through the spine.
It's called Kundalini energy.
And it going up,
it actually helps
to reprogram our neural
pathways, our brain alignment.
And that's beautiful.
Sometimes so the
shakes can happen,
and that's just also
helping the body
reset semantic nervous
system, cellular information.
So that's just reprogramming
the cells as well.
So this one is super dynamic.
It's like you've got a bagpipe.
The bagpipe's full.
The bagpipe's emptying.
[EXHALE]
Full breathing in.
[DEEP INHALE]
[EXHALE]
Relax the shoulders.
Breathe in forward.
Breathe out back.
And then relax the elbows.
Kind of like a steam train.
Beautiful action.
Beautiful.
Deep breath in, arms up.
[DEEP INHALE]
Breathe out, arms down
[EXHALE]
In, out.
Deep breath in.
[DEEP INHALE]
Hold.
Pulling the perineum.
When you need to
breathe out, you're
going to bring the arms
down and breathe out.
And you can make
the sound of "mm"
that suits the nervous system.
Breathing out when you're ready.
[HUMMING]
So techniques like
this are there
to break through
the person that's
attached to life
and things, and not
trusting your higher power
that everything in your life
is happening for you.
And when we do
techniques like this,
we break through this limited
paradigm of how we see things,
and we come more to the
essence of our being,
so we can apply wisdom to
living our lives purposefully.
And how are you feeling
about just your life?
And you sounded somewhat
overwhelmed earlier,
how are you feeling now?
>> Yeah, I think I've got
a good grasp on everything.
>> When he first came on this
journey, he was more within,
he was finding it challenging
to claim his power from life,
to stand his ground,
to build his esteem,
and to be confident
of what he's doing.
Although he's had
amazing gifts and talents
and has used them
intermittently,
he moved into being
more in a shell.
So two months later, to notice
how his practices opened him
up, that he's more socially
confident, and more outward,
he's a better family
man, and I suppose
more important
than anything else,
he has a better
relationship with himself.
>> From rebirthing breathing
to transformational breathing,
there are dozens of techniques
with different applications
and results.
The beauty of breath is that you
can feel the results instantly
the moment you bring your
consciousness into your breath.
>> One of the magical things
about breathwork is that it
helps us with brain mood
enhancing chemicals,
like serotonin, dopamine,
oxytocin, endorphins,
and dimethyltryptamine,
DMT, spirit molecule.
When we do advanced
techniques like this,
we have the possibility of
getting this stimulated,
and connecting what
I call in the quantum
field of all possibilities,
where we connect to our higher
selves, we connect
with source, we
can be incredibly
creative and productive
and achieve amazing
stuff from this domain.
You can have your hands on
your thighs or your knees.
And then breathing
in, we're going
to go through the nostrils,
and slightly spinal flex,
and breathing out,
let go with the mouth.
[DEEP INHALE]
[EXHALE]
And once you get
into it, you could
close your eyes,
which helps you then
to go more into inner world,
to just befriend the technique,
connect deeper with it.
And let's go a little faster.
Deep breath in.
[DEEP INHALE]
Breathe out.
[EXHALE]
Push out all the air.
Stay in that non breath
for 3 to 5 seconds.
Take a deep breath in.
Just allow the breath to
release the other sensations.
Allow the breath to
come back to normal,
connecting the intention
relating from your highest
self.
So we have the possibility to
influence our circumstances
by the energy, by
the connectivity
we have with source energy,
with creative force,
with the universe, or God, as
we choose this higher power
to be identified with.
Next technique
with a slower pace.
And we're going to keep
the body stationary.
So breathing in.
[DEEP INHALE]
[EXHALE]
Keep going.
You've got the rhythm.
Beautiful.
And just notice how deep
you are within yourself.
Are you in the zone.
And preferably in life, if
we can stay in the zone,
and live from that place,
and interact with life.
Hold the breath.
Relax the body.
Pull in the perineum.
Feel those sensations.
At the end, we're
going to breathe out
in three sounds, ah, ooh, mm.
The ah is working those
first three chakras,
the ooh the heart
chakra, and the mm
is working the crown
chakra and the third eye.
Squeeze it all out.
Pause for two seconds.
Deep breath in.
[DEEP INHALE]
One more time.
Pause for two seconds.
He reaches a place where
he's just very zen,
a state of homeostasis, instead
of balance, inner balance.
He's trusting.
He's having faith.
And that's pretty
much where I want
to offer the person to get to.
And with breathwork, we can
get there sooner than later.
And then we do a deep
relaxation for deep integration.
Sometimes the nervous
system is resetting
even while we're relaxing.
Trusting that it's all
for your higher good,
connecting with your intention
again, making yourself,
your intention set, and live
to the best of your ability.
At this time, and bringing
your hands slowly to your chest
or to the opposite
shoulder to give yourself
a hug in appreciation
of who you are.
Connecting with deeper breaths.
When you're ready, bending
your knees one at a time,
and rolling over towards me.
In your own timing.
Then when you're ready, after
a few nurturing breaths,
pushing yourself up
sideways, and using your hand
in front of your chest
coming up sideways.
That's it.
And closing your eyes again.
And just to soothe the
nervous system even deeper.
And a last level of nurturing.
Deep breath in.
[DEEP INHALE]
And a liberating sigh.
And let's gently pulling the
hands up into prayer position,
just giving thanks that
we have the opportunity
to know such practices
and to practice them
for our further alignment
so that we enjoy life more
and give more to life.
Thank you.
>> Thank you.
>> How are you feeling now?
>> Like I just woke
up from a dream.
[LAUGHTER]
My body is so happy
that I've done this.
It's just like thank you guy.
Thank you for giving
me some energy.
[LAUGHTER]
I have to get going.
I'm really enjoying the
practice with Aumji.
It's got a whole bunch
of different techniques,
and a whole lot of stuff
that I haven't done before.
And it's just like
nutrition for the lungs,
that good breathwork just
like energizes and balances
and just feels like I've
eaten well, like I've
treated myself healthy.
Yeah, I'm definitely
going to keep doing it.
And I also feel like the
more I do it regularly,
the more it forms a wave that
gets stronger and stronger.
Yeah, I feel like that ritual
or that repetition of it
is very important.
>> It's wonderful to see this
young man become younger,
get more youth, deal with
challenges in his life around
grief, insecurities, trauma.
It's just so beautiful to work
consistently with one person
and to track they're letting
go of stuff to free capacity
so that they're more primed and
he's a better man to himself,
he's a better husband, he's
a better father to his two
young daughters, and he's doing
some amazing work in the world
that he has been, and
now it's beautiful to see
how he's optimizing that.
>> Many ancient
cultures and practices,
including martial arts and
yoga, use breathwork techniques.
Various forms of
deepened breathing
are said to open access
to non ordinary states
of consciousness.
[MUSIC PLAYING]